Update propagation page for Node.js (#4722)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/languages/js/propagation.md

applications written in different languages without any differences.

{{% /alert %}}

Start by creating a new folder called `dice-client` and install the required
dependencies:

{{< tabpane text=true >}} {{% tab TypeScript %}}

```sh
npm init -y
npm install typescript \
  ts-node \
  @types/node \
  undici \
  @opentelemetry/instrumentation-undici \
  @opentelemetry/sdk-node \

# initialize typescript
npx tsc --init
```

{{% /tab %}} {{% tab JavaScript %}}

```sh
npm init -y
npm install undici \
  @opentelemetry/instrumentation-undici \
  @opentelemetry/sdk-node \
```

{{% /tab %}} {{< /tabpane >}}

Next, create a new file called `client.ts` (or client.js) with the following
content:

{{< tabpane text=true >}} {{% tab TypeScript %}}

```ts
import { NodeSDK } from '@opentelemetry/sdk-node';
import {
  SimpleSpanProcessor,
  ConsoleSpanExporter,
} from '@opentelemetry/sdk-trace-node';
import { UndiciInstrumentation } from '@opentelemetry/instrumentation-undici';
import { request } from 'undici';

const sdk = new NodeSDK({
  spanProcessors: [new SimpleSpanProcessor(new ConsoleSpanExporter())],
  instrumentations: [new UndiciInstrumentation()],
});

sdk.start();

> 

Author: Thanks for clarifying that @trentm, I did that for the JS code but forgot to verify for the TS code that things work as expected.

I wonder if it is worth to have this explanation stored somewhere, so that we can point people to it. I wonder if we have a place in docs for it 🤔

> 

Reviewer: Is there a pattern for per-lang troubleshooting docs, perhaps? Just throwing out an idea.
Or an "advanced" section for discussing getting-started gotchas?

in previous section. There might not be an instrumentation library that matches
a library you're using to have services communicate with one another. Or you
might have requirements that these libraries can't fulfill even if they existed.

When you must propagate context manually, you can use the
[context API](/docs/languages/js/context).

### Generic example

The following generic example demonstrates how you can propagate trace context
manually.

First, on the sending service, you'll need to inject the current `context`:

{{< tabpane text=true >}} {{% tab TypeScript %}}

```typescript
// Sending service
import { Context, propagation, trace } from '@opentelemetry/api';

// Define an interface for the output object that will hold the trace information.
interface Carrier {
  traceparent?: string;
  tracestate?: string;
}

// Create an output object that conforms to that interface.
const output: Carrier = {};

// Serialize the traceparent and tracestate from context into
// an output object.
//
// This example uses the active trace context, but you can
// use whatever context is appropriate to your scenario.

> propagation.inject(trace.getTracerProvider().getActiveContext(), output);

Reviewer: Could this use the same `propagation.inject(context.active(), output);` that is used in the JS tab below?

Author: Yes 🙌 

```suggestion
propagation.inject(context.active(), output);
```

like this?

Reviewer: That's what I meant yes. I haven't tested it myself to be sure.

Actually... just browsing `@opentelemetry/api` code, I don't believe there *is* a `.getActiveContext()` method. I'm curious where that code came from.  It should be `context.active()` -- per https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/js/context/#get-active-context

title: Propagation
description: Context propagation for the JS SDK
weight: 65
cSpell:ignore: rolldice
---

{{% docs/languages/propagation js %}}

## Automatic context propagations

> [Instrumentation libraries](../libraries) like

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Instrumentation libraries](../libraries/) like
```

[`@opentelemetry/instrumentation-http`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@opentelemetry/instrumentation-http)
or
[`@opentelemetry/instrumentation-express`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@opentelemetry/instrumentation-http)
propagate context across services for you.

If you followed the [Getting Started Guide](../getting-started/nodejs) you can
create a client application that queries the `/rolldice` endpoint.

{{% alert title="Note" %}}

You can combine this example with the sample application from the Getting
Started guide of any other language as well. Correlation works across
applications written in different languages without any differences.

{{% /alert %}}

Start by creating a new folder called `dice-client` and install the required
dependencies:

{{< tabpane text=true >}} {{% tab TypeScript %}}

```sh
npm init -y
npm install typescript \
  ts-node \
  @types/node \
  undici \
  @opentelemetry/instrumentation-undici \

>   @opentelemetry/sdk-node \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  @opentelemetry/sdk-node
```

# initialize typescript
npx tsc --init
```

{{% /tab %}} {{% tab JavaScript %}}

```sh
npm init -y
npm install undici \
  @opentelemetry/instrumentation-undici \

>   @opentelemetry/sdk-node \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  @opentelemetry/sdk-node
```

> weight: 65

Author: ```suggestion
weight: 65
cSpell:ignore: rolldice
```

---

{{% docs/languages/propagation js %}}

## Automatic context propagations

[Instrumentation libraries](../libraries) like
[`@opentelemetry/instrumentation-http`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@opentelemetry/instrumentation-http)
or
[`@opentelemetry/instrumentation-express`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@opentelemetry/instrumentation-http)
propagate context across services for you.

If you followed the [Getting Started Guide](../getting-started/nodejs) you can
create a client application that queries the `/rolldice` endpoint.

{{% alert title="Note" %}}

You can combine this example with the sample application from the Getting

> Started guide of any other language as well! Correlation works across

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Started guide of any other language as well. Correlation works across
```

{
  resource: {
    attributes: {
      // ...
    }
  },
  traceId: 'cccd19c3a2d10e589f01bfe2dc896dc2',
  parentId: undefined,
  traceState: undefined,
  name: 'GET',
  id: '6f64ce484217a7bf',
  kind: 2,
  timestamp: 1718875320295000,
  duration: 19836.833,
  attributes: {
    'url.full': 'http://localhost:8080/rolldice',
    // ...
  },
  status: { code: 0 },
  events: [],
  links: []
}
```

Take note of the traceId (`cccd19c3a2d10e589f01bfe2dc896dc2`) and ID
(`6f64ce484217a7bf`). Both can be find in the output of client as well:

```javascript {hl_lines=["6-7"]}
{
  resource: {
    attributes: {
      // ...
  },
  traceId: 'cccd19c3a2d10e589f01bfe2dc896dc2',
  parentId: '6f64ce484217a7bf',
  traceState: undefined,
  name: 'GET /rolldice',
  id: '027c5c8b916d29da',
  kind: 1,
  timestamp: 1718875320310000,
  duration: 3894.792,
  attributes: {
    'http.url': 'http://localhost:8080/rolldice',
    // ...
  },
  status: { code: 0 },
  events: [],
  links: []
}
```

Your client and server application successfully report connected spans. If you
send both to a backend now the visualization will show this dependency for you.

## Manual context propagation

> In some cases, it is not possible to propagate context automatically as outlined
> above. There may not be an instrumentation library that matches a library you're
> using to have services communicate with one another. Or you many have
> requirements these libraries cannot fulfill, even if they exist.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In some cases, it is not possible to propagate context automatically as outlined
in previous section. There might not be an instrumentation library that matches
a library you're using to have services communicate with one another. Or you
might have requirements that these libraries can't fulfill even if they existed.
```

// across services.
```

{{% /tab %}} {{< /tabpane >}}

On the receiving service, you'll need to extract `context` (for example, from
parsed HTTP headers) and then set them as the current trace context.

{{< tabpane text=true >}} {{% tab TypeScript %}}

```typescript
// Receiving service
import { Context, propagation, trace, Span } from '@opentelemetry/api';

// Define an interface for the input object that includes 'traceparent' & 'tracestate'.
interface Carrier {
  traceparent?: string;
  tracestate?: string;
}

// Assume "input" is an object with 'traceparent' & 'tracestate' keys.
const input: Carrier = {};

// Extracts the 'traceparent' and 'tracestate' data into a context object.
//
// You can then treat this context as the active context for your
// traces.
let activeContext: Context = propagation.extract(

>   trace.getTracerProvider().getActiveContext(),

Reviewer: Could `context.active()` -- as is used in the JS tab below -- be used here?

Author: ```suggestion
  context.active(),
```

Reviewer: Yup.

      trace.setSpan(activeContext, span);
      console.log('Parsed JSON:', json);
    } catch (e) {
      console.error('Error parsing JSON:', e.message);
    } finally {
      span.end();
    }
  });
});

// Listen on port 8124
server.listen(8124, () => {
  console.log('Server listening on port 8124');
});
```

Start a first shell to run the server:

```console
$ node server.js
Server listening on port 8124
```

Then in a second shell run the client:

```shell
node client.js
```

The client should terminate immediately and the server should output the
following:

```text
Parsed JSON: { key: 'value' }
```

Since the example so far only took dependency on the OpenTelemetry API all calls
to it are [no-op instructions](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NOP_(code)>) and
the client and server behave as if OpenTelemetry is not used.

{{% alert title="Note" color="warning" %}}

This is especially important if your server and client code are libraries, since
they should only use the OpenTelemetry API. To understand why, read the [concept
page on how to add instrumentation to your library]((/docs/concepts/instrumentation/libraries/).

{{% /alert %}}

> To enable OpenTelemetry and to see the context propagation in action, create an

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To enable OpenTelemetry and see the context propagation in action, create an
```

additional file called `instrumentation.js` with the following content:

```javascript
// instrumentation.js
const { NodeSDK } = require('@opentelemetry/sdk-node');
const {
  ConsoleSpanExporter,
  SimpleSpanProcessor,
} = require('@opentelemetry/sdk-trace-node');

const sdk = new NodeSDK({
  spanProcessors: [new SimpleSpanProcessor(new ConsoleSpanExporter())],
});

sdk.start();
```

Use this file to run both, the server and the client, with instrumentation
enabled:

```console
$ node -r ./instrumentation.js server.js
Server listening on port 8124
```

and

```shell
node -r ./instrumentation client.js
```

> After the client has send data to the server and terminated you should see spans

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After the client has sent data to the server and terminated you should see spans
```

> being print to the console on both shells.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
in the console output of both shells.
```

The output for the client looks like the following:

```javascript {hl_lines=[7,11]}
{
  resource: {
    attributes: {
      // ...
    }
  },
  traceId: '4b5367d540726a70afdbaf49240e6597',
  parentId: undefined,
  traceState: undefined,
  name: 'send',
  id: '92f125fa335505ec',
  kind: 1,
  timestamp: 1718879823424000,
  duration: 1054.583,
  // ...
}
```

The output for the server looks like the following:

```javascript {hl_lines=[7,8]}
{
  resource: {
    attributes: {
      // ...
    }
  },
  traceId: '4b5367d540726a70afdbaf49240e6597',
  parentId: '92f125fa335505ec',
  traceState: undefined,
  name: 'receive',
  id: '53da0c5f03cb36e5',
  kind: 1,
  timestamp: 1718879823426000,
  duration: 959.541,
  // ...
}
```

Similar to the [manual example](#manual-context-propagation) the spans are

> connected via the `traceId` and the `id`/`parentId`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
connected using the `traceId` and the `id`/`parentId`.
```

> ## Next Steps

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Next steps
```
